Hello everyone
So in this video we are going to learn why
should you learn data structures
We are going to learn something very interesting
So in our day to day life many applications such
as web browser Google map music player movie ticket
booking apps use some of the data structure concepts so
this video will give you a better understanding of why
should you learn data structures
So let us
Learn how data structures play a major role in our
day to day life
So we are must have used online ticket booking
systems at least once
It might be for booking tickets for train or maybe
bus or flights or movies or any other shows
If we want to book any seat it is just
a matter of clicking on a square and it will
be booked
But have you ever wondered that this is a two
dimensional array And this seat which is in row Three
and column four is seat of 34 so that is is a
real life application of array
now let us understand a browser's working so we are first
going to a webpage www dot google dot com and
now we are visiting the website log2base.com
Now there is a YouTube link
Now we click there and we go to that address
So whenever we visit a webpage see that you
url is stored here
Now we can click on the back button and go
to last visited web page
See when we click here we are back to
log2base2.com and from there we can
go back to www dot google dot com as well
And we are familier with these operations of a
browser
and this is actually an application of Stack which
follows the last in first
Out principal that is who came last will be gone
out first so simply by clicking a back button we
can go to last visited website
So that is how a stack is useful in our
daily life and we all have stood in a queue
at somewhere in our life may be at a bank
a restaurant or college etcetera and who comes first in
the queue will be served first and can go out
like this
That is first in first out principle which is exactly
what a queue data structure is who comes first will
be served first
But Stack was last in first
Out who Came last will be served
First Now can you think of any application for linked
list see we All have music player in our phones
and will have songs in it
Suppose You have four songs in your phone after playing
song one Song two will be played then song three
will be played and then Song four will be played
like that
It doesn't stop after playing one song
The next song will be played so the songs are
connected just the way nodes are connected in a linked
list
So this is an application of a singly linked list in
a singlely linked lists
The Nodes are connected in a single way so we
can go to Song Three from song two
But we cannot go in backwards at in doubly linked
list
The nodes are connected in both directions so we can
go either way so we can play song one then
song two
Then Song Three and from Song three
We can play song four as well
as song two that is we will have both previous
and next buttons so bi directional navigation is possible
And after all the songs are played the music player
will stop playing
But sometimes we play a playlist in a repeat mode
so that after the last song is completed the first
song will start playing again and it will play in
the cyclic mode and will never stop
So that is a circular linked list
The last node is connected to the first node again that
is The Last song is connected to the first song
again at it will repeat the playlist so that is
how linked lists are useful in our daily life
Now everybody uses Google map and can you guess which
data structure it uses Google map actually uses the graph
data structure
Where all the cities and states are connected as a
graph with distance information
If we want to go from Tamil Nadu to delhi
there might be many ways but using some algorithms
we can select the shortest path which saves a lot
of time
For example this way it takes 1000 kilometres and this
one will take 1500 kilometres and this one will take
2000 kilometres and the shortest path is 1000 kilometres and we
can proceed with this one
So that is how data structures play a major role
in our day to day life
In the upcoming series we will learn how to implement
all the data structures.